[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
roger johnson and nina warhurst good
morning our headlines today the
government says that there is growing
concern about a new strain of
coronavirus which appears to be
spreading rapidly
in the southeast more than two-thirds of
people in england are living under the
strictest cobit restrictions as more
areas move into tier three
good morning from reading in berkshire
where restrictions have increased
this morning what do retail and
hospitality businesses think the impact
would be on what would normally be their
busiest weekend of the year
i've been finding out the ballroom
battle for the glitter ball
is nearly over we'll look back at a
strictly series
like no other good morning the worst
test batting display for
65 years india bowled out this morning
for just 36
in their match against australia it is
their lowest ever test score
and the persistent rain which has
brought swollen rivers to parts of
england and wales is on its way out it's
going to be a weekend of sunshine and
showers details on that and the
prospects for christmas week coming up
near breakfast
[Music]
it is saturday the 19th of december
sports personality of the year is
tomorrow not tonight as the trailer said
just before the
top of the hour our top story today
though is that ministers have been
meeting to discuss how to contain the
rising number of covert cases
amid growing concerns over a new strain
of the virus
more than two-thirds of people in
england are now living under the
toughest restrictions as more areas
moved into tier three overnight andy
moore reports
police officers on patrol in luton
giving some friendly advice about
protection from kovid
make sure you know about the masters
benefit shear is joining many of the
home counties around london
in moving up to tier three from midnight
last night
that means 68 of the population of
england
is now covered by the toughest
restrictions
but one coveted patient at the local
hospital is worried about the easing of
restrictions over christmas
he believes he caught the virus from his
teenage son
people are being told the rules i know
it was a few weeks ago when it started
that
they can travel all over the country to
see their family you see
and this is worrying the hell out of me
if you if you saw the look on my son's
face
when i was fighting for my breath you
would not be wanting to send these
children
all over the country to see their family
routine operations were going ahead at
this hospital but many others are
struggling
ministers met yesterday to discuss the
outbreak amid
growing concerns about a new variant of
coronavirus
spreading widely in the southeast it's
feared it could be more infectious
what happens with viruses that they do
naturally mutate all the time
and the ones that are likely to do well
are the ones that increase transmission
and so we know this is a new variant it
has been seen in other countries
but it seems to be quite widespread
which suggests that it has got a
transmission advantage
there are reports that ministers have
discussed travel restrictions
into and out of the south east over
christmas but a government source said
nothing had been approved yet
andy moore bbc news
let's talk to our political
correspondent jessica parker she's in
our london newsroom this morning just
picking up on this meeting of
ministers yesterday jess what more can
you tell us about that
well look what we do know this morning
roger is that there is a growing concern
as andy was just saying particularly
about this new strain of coronavirus
particularly in the southeast
of england in terms of whether this
could lead to a shift
in terms of what's planned over
christmas we know there's this five-day
relaxation of the rules seven days if
you're traveling to and from
uh northern ireland downing street
sources are saying that they're not
there
yet but clearly there is huge concern
and boris johnson yesterday described
the situation
as worrying notably did not rule out the
idea of a possible
third lockdown in the new year for
england so i think that's indicative of
how concerned he is we know how
reluctant the prime minister was to go
for a second
national lockdown um because of the
damage that the first had caused to for
example
the economy where do we go next well i
think we'll have to see what comes from
the government
over the coming days they already
earlier this week
in terms of the christmas relaxation all
four nations
issued this strong new guidance to
suggest that okay
legally you can go and see your family
and spend time with up to
three households but we advise you don't
for example travel from a tier three
area in england to a tier one area so a
place where
rates of the virus are high to a place
where rates of the virus are low they're
recommended against the idea
of overnight stays so i think what we
have to watch out for is if the advice
is toughened up even further as andy was
reporting there there have been reports
that the idea of
travel restrictions have been discussed
or what we're hearing is that no
final decisions have yet been made
jessica thank you very much jessica
parker
scotland yards urging people not to
attend large gatherings this weekend
and to follow the guidelines in their
area the warning comes as another mass
anti-lockdown protest is planned to take
place in parliament square
the force has warned that officers will
have to take enforcement
action if people flout tier three rules
italy will go into lockdown over much of
the christmas and new year period in a
bid to prevent a third wave of
coronavirus
people living there will only be allowed
to leave their homes for work or health
reasons for four day periods
over christmas and new year as well as a
two-day period covering twelfth night
shops bars and restaurants will be
closed and travel between regions
will be banned a second coronavirus
vaccine has been given emergency
approval for use in the united states
more than 200 million doses of the
american-made moderna jab have been
purchased by the us government with 6
million due to be distributed
this weekend the usa has the world's
highest number of covered infections
and deaths talks on a post-brexit
trade deal between the united kingdom
and the european union are set to
continue into the weekend
with both sides warning that the chances
of agreement remain in the balance
the european parliament has been
pressing for an agreement by sunday
so that it can ratify any deal before
the current brexit transition period
ends on december the 31st however it's
thought that
eu leaders could provisionally sign off
on a deal
if the talks go beyond that point in the
uk
mps are on standby to return to
westminster from their christmas break
if an agreement can be struck in the
final days of the year
the queen was the first british monarch
to give a televised christmas day
address
in 1957 before that it was only
broadcast on the radio
and this year her speech will be at the
forefront of another technical
innovation
amazon has announced that the annual
message will be available on its voice
activated smart speakers
from three o'clock on christmas day last
year the address was watched by 24
million
people on the bbc and other major
broadcasters
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news